README.md, before:

# Sanitize-PDF
Sanitize or Flatten PDF documents which may have "active content" so they pass through corporate firewalls better

If you create multi-page PDFs with many pictures and graphics (such as a portfolio) and email them out to companies with strict firewalls (such as an HR department) you may have had those emails bounce back with an error message such as **"error: messages with active content/attachments (e.g. Office macros) will not be transmitted."**

PDFs can gain these features for any number of reasons, sometimes it's just the tools we use to create them. For example, it could be something as simple as using the "save as PDF" feature from Word docs, then using a free tools such as [PDF Split-And-Merge](https://pdfsam.org/download-pdfsam-basic/) to combine several of them into a single PDF document.

No matter how they gain them, there is a surprising lack of tools available to simply delete any "active content" a PDF may contain. It seems like the only easy solution requires either using an older (unavailable) version of Adobe Reader or paying for a full copy of Adobe Acrobat:

- [forums.adobe.com - 
How do I remove active content from a pdf file](https://forums.adobe.com/thread/1644285)
- [Step 4:  Preparing a PDF For Posting - HHS.gov](https://www.hhs.gov/web/section-508/making-files-accessible/create-accessible-pdfs/step-4/index.html)

Another (free) option is Ghostscript, "an interpreter for the PostScript language and for PDF". [PostScript](https://www.adobe.com/products/postscript.html) [2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PostScript) is old enough that it does not support embedded Flash or JavaScript exploits that may be present in modern PDFs. This question from security.stackexchange.com lays out the method employed here: [**Effectiveness of flattening a PDF to remove malware**][1].

## Dependencies:

 1. **Ghostscript 9.23** - [Chocolatey package](https://chocolatey.org/packages/Ghostscript) install: `choco install ghostscript -y`

Chocolatey is a package manager, used to automate software install, like apt-get for Windows. [Install Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/install).

#### Post-install instructions:

It seems like chocolatey does not successfully [auto-shim](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/wiki/FeaturesShim) the ghostscript executables after install. Which means you will have to shim the executables yourself to successfully call them from the batch file. 

*(Note: [shimgen.exe](https://chocolatey.org/docs/FeaturesShim) is a free tool included with Chocolatey)*

Run from command prompt or PowerShell:

*Assuming a 64-bit OS:* `shimgen --output=gswin64c --path="$env:ProgramFiles\gs\gs9.23\bin\gswin64c.exe" --debug`

## How-to-Use:

With *Ghostscript* installed, and gswin64c.exe either *shimmed* or added to the *PATH variable* as described above, Sanitize-PDF.bat is ready to use. 

**Sanitize-PDF.bat** must be in the same directory as the PDFs you wish to "sanitize". It's intended use is to drag-and-drop a PDF onto Sanitize-PDF.bat, and the script will take care of the rest!

Once finished, the Sanitize-PDF.bat will have generated 3 new PDF documents in the same folder it's located in. These three new documents are the result of the different methods employed to sanitize or flatten the original, as described below.

Sanitize-PDF.bat does not change or delete the original source document dropped on it. 

### How-it-works:

There are essentially 3 parts to this script even though it's not formatted to look that way, but referring to it this way will make it easier to talk about. The first part captures variables (and deletes waste) for use in the rest of the script. The second part is where ghostscript is invoked (gswin64c.exe) to execute several methods of removing "active content" as found in the [Security SE question][1]. The third and last part compares file sizes as a quick and simple method to show if the PDFs successfully lost any information from the conversion process (which is exactly what we want, we're trying to remove "active content" which we didn't intend to include, yet may be present in our PDFs anyway).

There are 3 "methods" used in the Ghostscript invocation phase:

1. Convert PDF-to-PDF using the ghostscript engine (assuming it works as a PostScript engine), using device `pdfwrite`. Output usually has a smaller file size, suggesting this method does remove things. 
2. Convert PDF-to-PostScript-to-PDF, using devices `ps2write` and `pdfwrite`. Although this seems like a saner method since it fully converts a PDF to a PostScript 2 document and writes it to disk, then takes that PS document as input and converts it to PDF again, in my testing the final PDF ends up *larger* than the original. This may be understandable since the intermediary PostScript document ends up around 20-30 MB in size generated from a 2-3 MB PDF document, but still not what we're looking for. 
3. Convert PDF-to-PDF and downsize all images, using `pdfwrite` device. This is the method recommended by the [Security SE question][1] and surprise surprise, it's the one that's been the most successful for me. 

[More info on Ghostscript devices](https://ghostscript.com/doc/current/Devices.htm)

After the script has ended, if you "Press ANY key..." it will delete the placeholder PostScript file. Alternatively, you can close the script window at this point and the postscript.ps file will remain for inspection.

### How-to-modify:

All input variables are set at the top of Sanitize-PDF.bat. You can change the names of the 3 final output PDFs, and the PostScript intermediary file, if you like.

To change how images are downsized (only used in the 3rd method as described above), the `_DPI` variable can be changed to whatever you like. I have several lines setting this var to different values, so you only have to comment out `::` the last lines you don't wish to use; it doesn't matter if you comment out lines above the `_DPI` values you wish to use. By default this script has:

```
SET "_DPI=63"
SET "_DPI=120"
SET "_DPI=150"
SET "_DPI=200"
::SET "_DPI=300"
```

So DPI will be set to 200 by default. If you wish to use 300, simply uncomment that line. To use 150 DPI instead, simply comment out the 200 line. To use 120 DPI, comment out the 150 and 200 lines. The last line setting DPI is what the DPI will be.

## (Un)planned features:

This script is intended to be a quick-n-dirty method to clean single PDFs before emailing them. The following is a list of some features that *could* be added later, but as it is now, this script is considered feature-complete (v1.0). I personally do not intend to add these features, since this script already does everything I need it to. Any more would be an exercise in helping others when I'm still uncertain any others will even want to use it. This may change if more people become interested in it though.

 - Auto-install Ghostscript 9.23 and auto-shim `gswin64c.exe`. I already have Get-Chocolatey.bat scripts I could whip together with something that calls shimgen.exe
 - Auto-detect 32-bit installs and adjust itself properly. I could either make copies of all 64-bit based scripts, or use a Find-and-replace function to modify the same scripts automatically.
 - Location independence - Currently, the Sanitize-PDF.bat is intended to reside in the same folder as the source PDFs, to make it easy to drag-and-drop and have the outputs ready in the same folder. To make it capable of accepting documents from other folders brings up the question of where to save the output PDFs: where the source document is located, or where the script itself is located? Possible, but it's complexity I'm not ready to add yet.
 
I do not have a proper 32-bit environment to test in, this is where most of my reluctance comes from. Spinning up VMs takes time and resources. Same goes for testing a clean Chocolatey install method, I'd have to either use VMs or uninstall Ghostscript and Chocolatey on my own machine just to test this. Perhaps if some friends are willing to let me use their machines as guinea pigs. 

## How to help:

 - Go to [Secruity.SE][1] and upvote that question for having such an awesome, accurate, functional answer in it. I basically copied and pasted their work verbatim. 
 - [PDFSAM Basic](https://pdfsam.org/download-pdfsam-basic/) is a free PDF Split-And-Merge tool, functionality normally only found in paid-for software. I use it all the time and never paid them a dime, so the best I can do for now is promote them for being awesome. Use it, share them on social media, and don't forget you can install [via Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/packages/pdfsam): `choco install pdfsam -y`
 - [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org) is an awesome tool for automating installing, uninstalling, updating, and managing software versions. You can install packages from their public repository, from a local source, or set up your own repository for internal use. They offer Pro and Business [editions](https://chocolatey.org/pricing) with virus scanning features and more, but the main functionality is always free.
 - And of course, the star of the show: [Ghostscript](https://ghostscript.com/)! Promote them on social media, help contribute if you know how, or help them bug test. A shout-out to all the folks who helped with this project for being awesome. 

Send me feature requests and bug reports if you like. No promises on delivery dates tho. 

## Disclaimer:

This script is not intended to remove all malware from any PDF or other document, and makes no such promises. Use at your own risk.

[1]: https://security.stackexchange.com/questions/103323/effectiveness-of-flattening-a-pdf-to-remove-malware

Commit message:

Added more links to Ghostscript reference

README.md, after:

# Sanitize-PDF
Sanitize or Flatten PDF documents which may have "active content" so they pass through corporate firewalls better

If you create multi-page PDFs with many pictures and graphics (such as a portfolio) and email them out to companies with strict firewalls (such as an HR department) you may have had those emails bounce back with an error message such as **"error: messages with active content/attachments (e.g. Office macros) will not be transmitted."**

PDFs can gain these features for any number of reasons, sometimes it's just the tools we use to create them. For example, it could be something as simple as using the "save as PDF" feature from Word docs, then using a free tools such as [PDF Split-And-Merge](https://pdfsam.org/download-pdfsam-basic/) to combine several of them into a single PDF document.

No matter how they gain them, there is a surprising lack of tools available to simply delete any "active content" a PDF may contain. It seems like the only easy solution requires either using an older (unavailable) version of Adobe Reader or paying for a full copy of Adobe Acrobat:

- [forums.adobe.com - 
How do I remove active content from a pdf file](https://forums.adobe.com/thread/1644285)
- [Step 4:  Preparing a PDF For Posting - HHS.gov](https://www.hhs.gov/web/section-508/making-files-accessible/create-accessible-pdfs/step-4/index.html)

Another (free) option is Ghostscript, "an interpreter for the PostScript language and for PDF". [PostScript](https://www.adobe.com/products/postscript.html) [2](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/PostScript) is old enough that it does not support embedded Flash or JavaScript exploits that may be present in modern PDFs. This question from security.stackexchange.com lays out the method employed here: [**Effectiveness of flattening a PDF to remove malware**][1].

## Dependencies:

 1. **Ghostscript 9.23** - [Chocolatey package](https://chocolatey.org/packages/Ghostscript) install: `choco install ghostscript -y`

Chocolatey is a package manager, used to automate software install, like apt-get for Windows. [Install Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/install).

#### Post-install instructions:

It seems like chocolatey does not successfully [auto-shim](https://github.com/chocolatey/choco/wiki/FeaturesShim) the ghostscript executables after install. Which means you will have to shim the executables yourself to successfully call them from the batch file. 

*(Note: [shimgen.exe](https://chocolatey.org/docs/FeaturesShim) is a free tool included with Chocolatey)*

Run from command prompt or PowerShell:

*Assuming a 64-bit OS:* `shimgen --output=gswin64c --path="$env:ProgramFiles\gs\gs9.23\bin\gswin64c.exe" --debug`

## How-to-Use:

With *Ghostscript* installed, and gswin64c.exe either *shimmed* or added to the *PATH variable* as described above, Sanitize-PDF.bat is ready to use. 

**Sanitize-PDF.bat** must be in the same directory as the PDFs you wish to "sanitize". It's intended use is to drag-and-drop a PDF onto Sanitize-PDF.bat, and the script will take care of the rest!

Once finished, the Sanitize-PDF.bat will have generated 3 new PDF documents in the same folder it's located in. These three new documents are the result of the different methods employed to sanitize or flatten the original, as described below.

Sanitize-PDF.bat does not change or delete the original source document dropped on it. 

### How-it-works:

There are essentially 3 parts to this script even though it's not formatted to look that way, but referring to it this way will make it easier to talk about. The first part captures variables (and deletes waste) for use in the rest of the script. The second part is where ghostscript is invoked (gswin64c.exe) to execute several methods of removing "active content" as found in the [Security SE question][1]. The third and last part compares file sizes as a quick and simple method to show if the PDFs successfully lost any information from the conversion process (which is exactly what we want, we're trying to remove "active content" which we didn't intend to include, yet may be present in our PDFs anyway).

There are 3 "methods" used in the Ghostscript invocation phase:

1. Convert PDF-to-PDF using the ghostscript engine (assuming it works as a PostScript engine), using device `pdfwrite`. Output usually has a smaller file size, suggesting this method does remove things. 
2. Convert PDF-to-PostScript-to-PDF, using devices `ps2write` and `pdfwrite`. Although this seems like a saner method since it fully converts a PDF to a PostScript 2 document and writes it to disk, then takes that PS document as input and converts it to PDF again, in my testing the final PDF ends up *larger* than the original. This may be understandable since the intermediary PostScript document ends up around 20-30 MB in size generated from a 2-3 MB PDF document, but still not what we're looking for. 
3. Convert PDF-to-PDF and downsize all images, using `pdfwrite` device. This is the method recommended by the [Security SE question][1] and surprise surprise, it's the one that's been the most successful for me. 

[More info on Ghostscript devices](https://ghostscript.com/doc/current/Devices.htm)

[More info on PDF switches](https://www.ghostscript.com/doc/9.23/Use.htm#PDF)

[LOTS more info on PDF switches](https://www.ghostscript.com/doc/9.23/VectorDevices.htm#PDFWRITE) (thank you again to @symcbean from [stackexchange][1] for distilling this down into something workable!)

After the script has ended, if you "Press ANY key..." it will delete the placeholder PostScript file. Alternatively, you can close the script window at this point and the postscript.ps file will remain for inspection.

### How-to-modify:

All input variables are set at the top of Sanitize-PDF.bat. You can change the names of the 3 final output PDFs, and the PostScript intermediary file, if you like.

To change how images are downsized (only used in the 3rd method as described above), the `_DPI` variable can be changed to whatever you like. I have several lines setting this var to different values, so you only have to comment out `::` the last lines you don't wish to use; it doesn't matter if you comment out lines above the `_DPI` values you wish to use. By default this script has:

```
SET "_DPI=63"
SET "_DPI=120"
SET "_DPI=150"
SET "_DPI=200"
::SET "_DPI=300"
```

So DPI will be set to 200 by default. If you wish to use 300, simply uncomment that line. To use 150 DPI instead, simply comment out the 200 line. To use 120 DPI, comment out the 150 and 200 lines. The last line setting DPI is what the DPI will be.

## (Un)planned features:

This script is intended to be a quick-n-dirty method to clean single PDFs before emailing them. The following is a list of some features that *could* be added later, but as it is now, this script is considered feature-complete (v1.0). I personally do not intend to add these features, since this script already does everything I need it to. Any more would be an exercise in helping others when I'm still uncertain any others will even want to use it. This may change if more people become interested in it though.

 - Auto-install Ghostscript 9.23 and auto-shim `gswin64c.exe`. I already have Get-Chocolatey.bat scripts I could whip together with something that calls shimgen.exe
 - Auto-detect 32-bit installs and adjust itself properly. I could either make copies of all 64-bit based scripts, or use a Find-and-replace function to modify the same scripts automatically.
 - Location independence - Currently, the Sanitize-PDF.bat is intended to reside in the same folder as the source PDFs, to make it easy to drag-and-drop and have the outputs ready in the same folder. To make it capable of accepting documents from other folders brings up the question of where to save the output PDFs: where the source document is located, or where the script itself is located? Possible, but it's complexity I'm not ready to add yet.
 
I do not have a proper 32-bit environment to test in, this is where most of my reluctance comes from. Spinning up VMs takes time and resources. Same goes for testing a clean Chocolatey install method, I'd have to either use VMs or uninstall Ghostscript and Chocolatey on my own machine just to test this. Perhaps if some friends are willing to let me use their machines as guinea pigs. 

## How to help:

 - Go to [Secruity.SE][1] and upvote that question for having such an awesome, accurate, functional answer in it. I basically copied and pasted their work verbatim. 
 - [PDFSAM Basic](https://pdfsam.org/download-pdfsam-basic/) is a free PDF Split-And-Merge tool, functionality normally only found in paid-for software. I use it all the time and never paid them a dime, so the best I can do for now is promote them for being awesome. Use it, share them on social media, and don't forget you can install [via Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org/packages/pdfsam): `choco install pdfsam -y`
 - [Chocolatey](https://chocolatey.org) is an awesome tool for automating installing, uninstalling, updating, and managing software versions. You can install packages from their public repository, from a local source, or set up your own repository for internal use. They offer Pro and Business [editions](https://chocolatey.org/pricing) with virus scanning features and more, but the main functionality is always free.
 - And of course, the star of the show: [Ghostscript](https://ghostscript.com/)! Promote them on social media, help contribute if you know how, or help them bug test. A shout-out to all the folks who helped with this project for being awesome. 

Send me feature requests and bug reports if you like. No promises on delivery dates tho. 

## Disclaimer:

This script is not intended to remove all malware from any PDF or other document, and makes no such promises. Use at your own risk.

[1]: https://security.stackexchange.com/questions/103323/effectiveness-of-flattening-a-pdf-to-remove-malware
